platform but this does not reduce the risk for the lender. The risk for the lender is that the amount might not be repaid. Since this is an unsecured lending there is a high risk that if the borrower might not be able to repay the money there is no recourse to some asset to recover the amount. This is why the interest rates on such loans are quite high, although the amounts are very low. The time period for the borrowing is usually short term and it is an easy way to get some funds when there is an immediate need for money. The borrower is able to borrow smaller amounts using these platforms and that too in a short period of time. This is a growing field and lenders as well as borrowers need to be alert about the conditions and features of the loan when they use this mode to transact. 4.9 Understand loan calculations Many investors need assistance in understanding how much loan is good for them. The financial pressures arising from debt are linked to debt repayment. What is the Equated Monthly Instalment (EMI) for a loan under consideration? EMI can easily be calculated in MS Excel using the ‘=pmt’ function as shown in the example Determining the EMI Type = 0, assuming end of the period. FV = 0 The point to note is that b, c and d in the table are defined in terms of per period – a year in the above case. If each year Rs. 27,740.97 is to be paid, then the monthly payment would be Rs. 27,740.97 ÷ 12 i.e. Rs. 2,311.75, payable for 5 X 12 i.e. 60 months. This instalment represents a combination of principal and interest. If the debt is at 1% per month interest and loan is to be repaid in 5 years, interest per period would be 1% and number of periods would be 60. Accordingly, the equated instalment would be Rs. 2,224.44 by changing the variables. 80 Lenders use the term ‘rest’ to indicate the interest charging cycle, which can be different from the payment cycle. For example, interest is chargeable at 12% p.a. on annual reset. The repayment obligation needs to be worked out, initially for the interest charging cycle (period =1 year in this example). Thereafter, each instalment is calculated. Thus, if payment cycle is quarterly, the annual instalment is to be divided by 4; monthly instalment is calculated by dividing the annual instalment by 12. Suppose interest is chargeable on annual reset and payment cycle is monthly. The implication for the borrower is that although repayments are being made monthly, the lender will adjust the loan obligations (for calculation of interest charge) only every year. Since borrower is not getting credit for payments made during the year, the effective borrowing cost turns out to be higher than the interest rate quoted by the borrower. If the borrower earns Rs. 10,000 per month, and this is the only debt, then debt servicing ratio would be Rs2,224.44 ÷ Rs10,000 i.e. 22.24%. This can be reduced by increasing the tenor or reducing the interest cost or reducing the amount borrowed. Suppose the tenor is extended to 6 years. Then the EMI changes from Rs.2,224.44 to Rs 1955.02. The revised debt servicing ratio is 19.55%. If the borrower has another loan on which repayment is Rs1,000 per month, then total debt servicing is Rs1,955.02+ Rs1,000 i.e. Rs2,955.02. Debt servicing ratio would then be 29.55%. 4.10 Loan restructuring There might be some sort of financial stress for the borrower that would make them unable to pay the loan that has been taken. For an individual this can happen when they lose their job and their income stops or it could happen when they face a sharp reduction in their income either through a pay cut for an employee or through loss of business or professional income for others. The financial institution would not like the loan to become a non performing asset and hence they would want to ensure that there is a loan restructuring. Under a loan restructuring there is a change in the conditions related to an existing loan. This could involve a reduction in the EMI that is being paid so that the loan becomes affordable or it could be an increase in the time period for repayment. These have to be seen in two ways where the first is the affordability for the client. This should fit into their financial condition, so that it does not disrupt their other payments and expenses. The other aspect is the actual value of such a change and this is known through the present value of all the future payments that are going to occur. For example, consider a loan of Rs. 3 lakh that has to be repaid over the next 3 years at an interest rate of 7 per cent when the rest is monthly. In this case the existing EMI would come to Rs. 9,263. If the period of the loan is extended to 5 years then the payment periods go from 81 36 to 60 and this will bring down the EMI to Rs 5,940. The entire flow of Rs 5,940 is nothing but the cash flow whose present value will be equal to the loan amount. This is calculated by using the PMT function=PMT(0.07/12,36,-300000,,) PMT = 9263 This kind of calculation can be done for any situation wherein the amounts are adjusted so that the present value for the lender remains the same. There can be cases where the lender takes a haircut and in this case the amount that is to be repaid would be less. In the example above if the lender decides to reduce the amount to be repaid to Rs 2 lakh and the loan period remaining is at 3 years then the EMI would drop to Rs 6,175 which would be a real relief for the borrower because they are paying less in terms of present value of the final payments. =PMT(0.07/12,36,-200000,,) =6,175 A simple reduction in the number of instalments would again mean that the borrower is going to pay a lesser amount in terms of present value on the loan. However, this has to be seen in the light of whether the amount of the instalment has been raised. This could cancel out the benefit of the lower number of instalments, so this has to be checked. In some cases, the restructuring will also involve a reduction in the interest rate. When there is a reduction in the rate the borrower will end up saving some payments if all the other conditions related to the loan remain the same. For example, if the 7 per cent rate in the example goes to 5 per cent then the EMI will drop from Rs 9,253 to Rs 5,994. This is a real saving only if the period of repayment is not increased. Sometimes an additional loan is given which will help in tackling the financial crisis and this can help the repayment of the amounts on the earlier loan. The conditions of the new loan will once again need to be seen in the light of the present value calculations so that this does not end up putting a higher burden on the borrower. The client has to ensure that they are paying the right amount under the entire restructuring process because unless they check the present value of the cash flows, they will not be able to know what the real situation actually is. 4.11 Repayment schedules with varying interest rates The repayment schedule on a loan is a significant component that is often ignored because all that an individual focuses on is the EMI amount. The repayment of a loan consists of two parts which is interest and capital repaid. There might be a specific amount paid but every 82 individual also needs to see the amount that is being repaid towards capital as well as interest as it will determine the amount that is outstanding on the loan. The normal EMI amount is found out by the PMT function in Excel but to get a proper break up of how the interest and the capital are being repaid there is a need to look at more functions. This would be the PPMT function for the purpose of knowing the principal part of the repayment. In this part the principal component of the EMI will be known and this will give an idea of the kind of money going to repay the capital borrowed. Similarly, for the interest component it is the IPMT function that has to be used. Taken an example where the interest rate is 7 per cent that is being paid on a loan of Rs. 10 lakh that has to be repaid in a period of 10 years in monthly instalment assuming that the rest is monthly. Using the simple PMT function the EMI for this repayment would come to Rs. 11,610. The next part of the exercise is to see how this would be broken up into the principal and interest part. In the PPMT function there is the interest rate that has to be entered along with the period which is the period for which the break up has to be found. In this case if you want the principal payment for the first month then 1 entered here with the total loan period of 120 months and the loan amount would give an amount of Rs. 5,777. Using the IPMT function the interest component comes to Rs. 5,833 which shows the total breakup of the entire EMI. For the principal calculation for the firm EMI =PPMT(0.07/12,1,120,-1000000) = 5,777 For the interest calculation for the first EMI =IPMT(0.07/12,1,120,-1000000) =5,833 If the interest rate is lower at say 5% in the example then the total EMI drops to Rs. 10,606. However, this has a big impact on the distribution of the interest and the capital within the EMI. Now the capital repaid in the first instalment is Rs. 6,440 while the interest component is Rs. 4,166. As can be seen since the overall interest rate is lower a larger part is going towards the capital repayment right from the initial EMI. To contrast the situation, consider the position when the interest rate is 9 percent. In this case the EMI would rise to Rs. 12,667. Now out of this amount in the first month it is just Rs. 5,167 that goes towards the principal and the remaining Rs. 7,500 goes towards the interest 83 component. A higher interest rate has led to a higher total interest cost which means more goes towards interest right from the first payment. 4.12 Criteria to evaluate loans There are multiple features of loans that differ and this need to be considered by anyone who wants to take a loan. The exact feature can make a huge difference as far as the final cost or expense on the loan is concerned. Here are some criteria that can be considered while looking at loans. a) The interest rate on the loan is one of the most vital criteria to consider. The rate of interest that is charged is significant and a lower rate will be better than a higher rate but this is not enough. The method of calculation of the rate is also a factor. The interest rate has to be calculated on a reducing balance method as compared to a fixed capital so that the repayment benefit on the loan leads to a lower interest rate. b) The period after which the loan is reset for interest rate changes is also critical. A very long period of say a year could mean that the benefit of some rate cuts come to the individual borrower very late. This could result in the outstanding amount not being affected much. In case of a rising interest rate then the same thing could be a benefit as the higher rates kick in after a longer time period. c) There are different expenses involved at the time of taking a loan. This could include a processing fee or legal/other charges which can be expressed as a small percentage of the loan amount or a fixed sum. This will raise the cost of the loan as this is a payment that is additional to the interest cost. Many times, these processing charges are waived and that can be a factor that leads to some savings for the borrower. d) The time period of the loan being offered will be a serious factor that can decide where to take a loan from. There are situations when some institution offers a longer time period for repayment and this could be favourable for someone who wants a longer term loan. A longer time period of repayment means a higher interest outgo but for those who want to reduce their EMI the choice here could be crucial. e) The nature of the benchmark that is available for the loan is also a factor that an individual has to consider before making their decision about a loan. There are now loans linked to an external benchmark like the repo rate which is transparent. Internal bank benchmarks often do not change as quickly as the changes in the rates in the economy as the transmission of the rates takes place slowly. The changes can work either ways because a rising rate scenario will lead to higher rates coming through quicker so this also needs to be considered before a final decision is made. Nowadays, usually, Banks show their floating rate loans rather than 84 fixed rate loans because in a fixed rate loan, in case interest rates in the economy move up, the margin will be an issue. In a floating rate loan, rate changes are fast and transparent. 4.13 Opting for change in EMI or change in tenure for interest rate changes Floating rate loans are a very popular category of loans and most long-term loans are of this nature. The changes in the linked benchmark to the loan will lead to a change in the interest rate applicable on the loan. There are two choices that come before the borrower when the interest rate changes and this is to either change the EMI amount or change the time for which the loan would be repaid. Making a choice as to what route to adopt is crucial for the individual because they will be affected by how their loan payment behaves. There is a clear working that is done when the loan is taken. The EMI that has been selected is usually an amount that is affordable for the individual given their income and savings level. So, it is easier to deal with a situation wherein this remains the same and the tenure of the loan changes it is easier to keep track of the same amount that has to be paid rather than having this change with each change in the applicable interest rate. It is also that there would be some times when the interest rate rises and if the EMI starts rising then this could impact the financial situation or cause distress if the loan payment goes higher than what is optimal. There can be times when the interest rate change can be reflected in the EMI. If for example a loan has been taken at a high interest rate and this has declined significantly then the tenure would have come down quite a bit. To ensure that there is a reduction on the monthly outgo there could be a onetime reduction in the EMI which would reset the entire working. In other circumstances when the EMI pressure is high then such a change in interest rate can be used to change the EMI and keep the financial situation strong. 4.14 Invest the money or pay off outstanding loan Many times, the individual has some amount that they received either as a lump sum or even as a one-time gain or windfall. The question that arises at such a time is whether the amount should be used to make an investment or to pay off an outstanding loan. There are different conditions that would impact the decision and some factors here would be as follows: 1. If there is a very high loan burden, which is a strain on the finances then the amount received can be used to pay down the loan and bring it to a comfortable level. This would relieve a lot of mental pressure and while in some cases this might not be the best opportunity for deployment, it could be essential for mental peace or pressure. 2. The amount that is available to repay the loan or invest also has to be seen in the context of both the absolute figure and a relative figure. In terms of absolute amounts, if this is quite high, then this could be significant in terms of the decision made. Hence, additional factors 85 like the interest rate on the loan and the earnings on the investment need to be considered. However, if the absolute amount is small, this might not make a big difference in terms of repaying the loan if the loan amount is large. In case the amount available is a significant portion of the loan, then repayment could lead to a debt free situation being seen earlier. 3. The mathematical aspect of the decision would depend on two main things. What is the interest rate that is being charged on the loan and what is the average earning, which would be available from the investment amount going forward? In some cases, the decision is easy to make, as a high-cost credit card outstanding or a personal loan would see a repayment as a better choice. When it comes to the question of earnings, then one needs to look for a longer time period in the future because unlike a loan where the repayment of the EMI leads to a reduction in the interest component in the entire working, the reverse is true for the investment. The benefit of compounding would mean that a good rate of return would boost the capital amount significantly, so that in some time the capital available would be high which would easily pay off the loan and still have some amount left as investment. 4. The asset class of the investment also has to be considered because if one is planning to invest in equity then there is also an extra risk that is being taken, However, if the return here over the longer term comes to around say 12 percent while the loan rate is around 7 percent then the better idea would be to invest. However, when there is a higher earning investment, then there is also a risk element involved. This should not be forgotten. Sometimes the rates are not very different in the loan and the investment but still the latter is compounding, so it could lead to a better return on the money some time down the line, if it sustains. 4.15 Strategies to reduce debt faster A large amount of debt can seem to be a big problem in terms of the amount outstanding as well as the interest cost that this also brings along. The goal of many people would be to reduce the debt as quickly as possible. There are several strategies that can be used in this regard. 4.15.1 Avalanche The avalanche strategy for paying off debt involves looking at the various loans and borrowings and paying off those with the highest interest rates first. This is a logical way of going about the repayment process because the highest interest rate loans are the most costly and hence this is expected to bring down the interest burden. The thought is also that the lower interest rate loans will not hurt the financial situation as much, so they can be paid off later. The risk in such a strategy is that if the higher rate loans are less in terms of absolute amounts, then paying off them first will not reduce the interest payment pressure as expected. 86 For example, if an individual has a credit card outstanding of Rs. 30,000 (42 % interest), a personal loan Rs. 1.2 lakh (21 % interest), a housing loan of Rs. 15 lakh (8 % interest) and a car loan Rs. 1 lakh (12 % interest) then the avalanche strategy will lead to repayment of the credit card first followed by the personal loan and then the car loan. This will reduce high interest- bearing debt first followed by others. 4.15.2 Snowball The snowball route of repayment of debt focuses on the amount of the loan. In order to get a sense of success in the repayment the method first starts off with the lowest debt amount and then moves to the higher amount that is outstanding. In the snowball method, the interest rate does not come into the decision making consideration, so it could be that some lower amount outstanding has a low interest rate but this will still be repaid first while a higher cost loan still remains standing. This kind of strategy is useful to achieve a sense of success when there are quite a few loans remaining. The exact mixture of the amounts outstanding and the rates could still leave the interest pressure high, if the high amount loans have a higher outstanding and hence this is not preferred for the example, we took above for credit card and car loan etc. In the snowball strategy the goal is to pick up momentum as the next repayment occurs. When the first loan is paid off the amount saved here is sought to be mixed and rolled on to the next loan repayment with the expectation that this will keep gaining in terms of amount, so the next higher debt becomes easier to pay. This is often used as a motivational strategy. 4.15.3 Blizzard The blizzard approach to repaying debt is a mixture of the avalanche and snowball methods. This starts