ensure that the individual is able to incur some expenses and pay them off in a few days. All these are facilities for an individual but they need to be used responsibly. One of the key points that every individual needs to follow is that they should never borrow more than what they can afford. A lifestyle that is flashy might seem enchanting but there is a cost that has to be paid for this and if this is not sustainable then it is better to not go down that path. In terms of expenses an individual should be responsible enough to buy only those things for which they can make payments. The best way to use a credit card is to pay off the amounts by the due date and not leave any amount as revolving credit. On the loan front it is better to borrow for assets that are value appreciating in nature and which can yield some income down the line. Also, too many loans at the same time can make debt servicing very difficult and hence this has to be avoided. Ensuring that debt options are 72 used responsibly will ensure that this is sustained over a longer time period and at the same time the goals are also attained. 4.6 Secured and Unsecured loans There are various types of loans based on the nature of the security that is present for the lender of these loans. One is secured loans and as the name suggests these loans are backed by some asset as security. The most common example of such a secured loan is that of housing loans. When an individual takes a housing loan the lender takes the house as a security or mortgage. This is a source of comfort for the lender in case the borrower is not able to repay the money. The asset that is present as security remains in the name of the borrower but in case the loan is not repaid then the lender can take over and dispose of the asset to recover the money. The most visible outcome of such a security is that the interest rates on such loans are relatively lower. Vehicle loans, Gold loans, loans against securities are some other examples of secured loans. Unsecured loans are those loans where the lender does not take any security from the borrower. In such loans there is just the personal security or guarantee of the borrower to repay the amount, so this is more risky in terms of lending. The outcome is that such loans are costlier in terms of a higher interest rate to be paid by the borrower. Examples of such loans are personal loans and credit card dues. The interest rate on such loans can be quite steep. Clients should be advised to use secured loans for building long term assets as the cost will be lower if needed and ensure that the unsecured loans are kept to a minimum or regularly paid before the interest cycle kicks in on credit cards. 4.7 Terms related to loans 4.7.1 Fixed Rate Loans Fixed rate loans are those loans where the interest rate on the loan is fixed for the entire duration of the loan. This enables the borrower to know the exact cost that they would face over the entire duration of the loan. Fixed rate loans are useful when the interest rates are low and the borrower wants to lock into these low rates. 4.7.2 Variable or Floating Rate Loans Variable rate loans are also known as floating rate loan. These loans have an interest rate that changes or gets reset periodically with the changes to the benchmark rate to which this is linked. Variable rate loans can be linked to an external benchmark like the repo rate or an external bank benchmark rate like the Marginal Cost of Lending Rate (MCLR). These types of 73 loans are preferred by borrowers for long term loans especially when they feel that the rates are likely to fall over a period of time. 4.7.3 Home equity loan A home equity loan is also called a loan against property (LAP). In such a loan the borrower uses the home or any other real estate as collateral for the purpose of taking a loan. The home is the asset of the individual and they are thus borrowing against the security of this asset. The borrowing enables them to raise money which can be used for several purposes. The value of the property and the extent to which the lending institution gives money against the value is what will determine the extent of the home equity loan. 4.7.4 Hire purchase A hire purchase agreement is one where an individual agrees to buy a certain asset by paying instalments over a period of time. There is an initial payment that is made followed by several instalments over a given time period. The person paying the amounts becomes the owner of the asset when the final instalment is paid. This separates the hire purchase transaction from a lease because here the individual can become the owner of the asset at the end of the agreement period when all payments are made. 4.7.5 Lease A lease is a contractual agreement where the owner of an asset called the lessor allows another person called the lessee to use the asset for a certain period of time in exchange for the payment of lease. Assets like property, vehicles, machinery etc. are those where a lease agreement is normally seen. The difference in a lease as compared to a hire purchase is that the lessor will remain the owner of the asset and the lessee cannot become the owner even after the specified lease period is over. This is largely used for vehicles by large companies. 4.7.6 Amortisation The process of amortisation of a loan is one where the capital borrowed is repaid over a period of time. This is done through fixed payments which are also known as Equated monthly Instalments (EMI). The entire repayment amount is converted into equal fixed amount called the EMI. This gives an element of stability and certainty to the repayments and the borrower knows exactly how much they need to repay each month. However, there is a schedule to the whole amortisation whereby the EMI repaid consists of both capital and interest in different proportions. The amortisation chart will list out the breakup of the EMI into the interest and capital component each month. There is a higher element of interest component in the EMI repayments in the earlier period of the loan which becomes smaller as the capital component increases with time. 74 4.7.7 Refinancing The act of refinancing a loan means that an individual repays an existing loan by taking another loan either to extend the duration of loan or lower the interest cost. The reason for doing this is that there is a lower interest rate on the new loan which will reduce the overall outgo because a lesser amount has to be paid on the loan. The refinancing is usually done for long term loans or for those loans where the amount outstanding is high as in these cases the savings on the interest will also be higher. An example is refinancing a home loan when the difference between the existing rate paid by the borrower and the new available rate is significant. 4.7.8 Prepayment There is a specific schedule that is prepared for every loan wherein the total amount to be repaid is broken down into equal instalments. There are times when the borrower has some extra amounts and they would like to reduce the outstanding amount of the loan. At such a point they can go and make a prepayment which is paying back the capital before the specified time. The prepayment will reduce the capital and it will reduce the remaining EMI period too on the loan. Lots of loans, restrict the prepayment of the loans for certain periods like 12 months or levy charges for prepayment e.g. car loan. RBI has mandated that there would be no pre-payment charges for home loans taken from banks. 4.7.9 Pre EMI interest The Pre EMI interest refers to the monthly payments that are made on the loan which includes only the interest component being repaid. Normally a loan will not have capital amount repaid till the time that the entire loan is disbursed. This kind of pre-EMI interest is usually present for house properties that are not yet complete and hence the full amount of the loan has not been taken or possession has not been received for the property. The amount that is being repaid here just consists of the interest component and the normal EMI repaying both capital and interest will start at a later date. 4.7.10 Moratorium Moratorium refers to a period wherein the repayments on a loan are stopped temporarily or for a certain period of time because of some extraordinary factors also known as (a.k.a) force majeure or tough conditions including some crisis or war or similar situation. The important thing is that under normal circumstances non-payment of the regular EMI will be considered a default but under a moratorium there is a pause and no default is counted. This does not affect the credit score and credit history of the borrower. The interest meter during the moratorium continues so the dues of the borrower keep increasing. The EMI missed during 75 the moratorium are pushed back but they will have to be repaid with the additional interest. For example, banks and financial institutions have given several months of moratorium to borrowers following the Covid outbreak. During Covid-period moratorium, many consumers assumed the EMIs for this period is being done away with, without realizing that the meter is still on, with compound interest. 4.7.11 Mortgage A mortgage is a debt instrument that is backed by a specified property that the borrower has to pay back over a specified time period through regular payments. In simple words, a home loan backed by the security of the property is also called a mortgage. Individuals use mortgages to buy properties without putting up the entire money upfront as this allows them to repay the amount over a period of time. It allows for leverage in buying an asset which they would otherwise not be able to afford. 4.7.12 Pledge A pledge is something that is held as a security on a contract. In case of a debt this is an asset that is held and which can be sold by the lender in case the borrower is not able to repay the amount. Under a pledge the asset which is usually a movable asset remains with the lender till the loan is repaid. This can be contrasted with a mortgage which is for an immovable asset. 4.7.13 Hypothecation This is a term used for creating a charge against an asset but in this case the asset remains with the borrower. In this sense it differs from a pledge where the asset is with the lender. If there is a default then the lender will have to first take possession of the asset and then sell it. The best example of hypothecation is that of a car loan where the asset is with the user and if there is a default the lender comes and repossesses the car. 4.8 Types of borrowing 4.8.1 Home Loan A home loan is a loan that is taken for the purchase of a house property. This can be to purchase a constructed property or it can be an under-construction property. In case of an individual, those who buy a house either for living or for investment can take a loan for the purpose. The loan is taken because the cost of the house is high and it is not possible for everyone to pay the full amount from their own financial resources. The home loan is the amount that is borrowed from the financial institution to pay for the purchase of the property. Home loans are a long-term loan and the period for this can stretch even for 30 to 35 years subject to working age limits. This makes it a significant loan because even the amount of the 76 loan is likely to be large. The interest that is paid on the loan will thus be huge since it stretches over a longer time period. The security against the loan is the property itself and the financial institution takes the property documents and keeps it with itself till the loan is repaid. 4.8.2 Education Loan The cost of education is rising with each passing year. Courses for post-graduation or higher education and in many cases even graduation have become very expensive. This can make it difficult for someone with low savings or without large assets to actually finance the education of their children. An education loan is one which is used to fund the cost of education. This is not a very long-term loan as the time period of repayment is usually 5 to 8 years. One of the features of an education loan is that the repayment usually starts after the completion of the education course or when the person completing the course starts earning whichever is earlier. Till this time the interest keeps accumulating on the loan. The loan can be repaid by the parent or even by the child who was educated. 4.8.3 Vehicle loan A vehicle, be it a two-wheeler or a four-wheeler, is now a requirement for many people across the country. The lack of proper public transport plus the convenience of an owned vehicle makes this an essential asset. A loan that is taken for the purpose of purchase of a vehicle is called a vehicle loan. The vehicle is hypothecated against the loan and the individual is then able to use the vehicle. The vehicle loan is usually for a period of 3 to 7 years and the longer the time period the lower will be the EMI but the total interest paid will keep climbing. The individual has to choose the right time period and the EMI which is affordable to them plus it does not put too much burden in terms of interest payments since the vehicle is usually a depreciating asset. 4.8.4 Business Loan A loan that is taken for the purpose of conducting business or profession is a business loan. This differs from an individual taking a loan to purchase an asset. In this case, the amount would be used for the purpose of running the business. The lending institution would look at the financial position of the business and whether it would be able to repay the amount that has been borrowed. For this purpose, the working capital requirement and various turnover ratios are also seen along with the strength of the balance sheet. A business loan can often have the security of an asset so that there is additional comfort for the lender or it could be that the goods that are produced are hypothecated in the form of stock i.e. goods/inventory. There are often overall limits for the business loan and the amount 77 that is required is utilised. Depending on the nature of the business and the economic cycle there could be different amounts that can be used on this loan at varying time periods. 4.8.5 Personal loan There are times when an individual would want to spend some money for purposes like travel or even buy some gadget or use the money for a wedding. The full amount that is required might not be available at that specific time. At other times they might have to pay for some expense like a medical emergency or some other debt repayment that cannot be done due to lack of funds. In such times, there is a personal loan which can be taken. This loan is one which can be used for any purpose and there is no fixed area in which this has to be spent. The personal loan is given without any security and hence it is called a personal loan, which an individual can use any way they want. There are no restrictions on its usage but there is a cost that comes with this freedom. A personal loan is far more expensive than a normal loan backed by an asset and one has to be very careful when using such loans because they are easy to get. The amount of such loans can be easily spent but paying back can become a problem if care is not taken. 4.8.6 Credit card debt Credit card is a way to access short term credit for an individual. A credit card has a specified spending limit and a person can use the credit card to spend up to the limit. At the end of the billing period cycle the total amount that has been spent is the amount to be repaid on the credit card. Payment of the amount by the due date will not involve any charge but if a part of the amount is carried forward then the interest meter starts ticking. Since this is an unsecured loan there is a large interest charged on credit card remaining unpaid which makes it a very expensive way to borrow. Credit card debt is the most expensive way to borrow but it is also the easiest because an individual needs to just swipe the card or enter the details online and the transaction is completed. People end up spending far more than what they would be able to repay immediately and they end up getting stuck in the revolving credit cycle. With a high rate of interest, the dues also keep increasing at a quick rate so one has to be very careful in keeping control over expenses when using credit cards. 78 4.8.7 Overdraft A bank account allows an individual to use the money that is present in the account. The normal way of using the account is that one can spend only upto the balance that is present in the account. There are times when a higher amount is required for just a few days or a short time period and taking a loan for such a situation would take up too much effort and be time consuming too. The solution is an overdraft wherein the individual is allowed to use more than the balance in the account up to the limit specified in the overdraft. The overdraft facility is usually used by businesses. There is some asset like a fixed deposit or some other security that is taken by the bank when the overdraft limit is sanctioned. The individual can issue cheques and make payments from the account and the interest is charged only for the time period for which the account was overdrawn. Any amount received can be deposited into the bank account and this would automatically reduce the overdraft amount. This is a flexible and easy way to access short term credit. 4.8.8 Loan against securities, gold, property etc. There is a category of loans which is in the nature of secured loans. There are various assets like some investment in a mutual fund or shares or even gold that is available with the individual. If there is some need for money then instead of selling the asset there is an option to take a loan against the asset. In this type of loan, the individual uses the security as collateral and gets a loan which has to be repaid according to the schedule that has been set up. The loan that is taken under this route is given at a certain percentage of the value of the asset as per RBI guidelines. In case there is a sharp downward movement in the price of the asset then the bank can also ask the borrower to deposit some money to cover the change in value. A large loan can also be taken in the form of loan against property, wherein the asset is used to raise money. The repayment capacity of the borrower is considered in deciding the amount that is sanctioned so this remains an important factor. Loans against an asset or security is preferred over personal loan or credit card outstanding, provided you have an asset, as the rates are lower. 4.8.9 P2P loans Peer to Peer loans, also known as P2P loans, involve one person lending to another person directly instead of a financial institution lending to an individual. There are P2P lending platforms where a person can register themselves and then give or take loans. What happens in these types of loans is that an individual is giving money to another person and this is an unsecured credit because there is no security behind the lending. There is a basic background 79 check that is made of the people on the platform but this does not reduce the risk for the lender. The risk for the lender is that the amount might not be repaid. Since this is an unsecured lending there is a high risk that if the borrower might not be able to repay the money there is no recourse to some asset to recover the amount. This is why the interest rates on such loans are quite high, although the amounts are very low. The time period for the borrowing is usually short term and it is an easy way to get some funds when there is an immediate need for money. The borrower is able to borrow smaller amounts using these platforms and that too in a short period of time. This is a growing field and lenders as well as borrowers need to be alert about the conditions and features of the loan when they use this mode to transact. 4.9 Understand loan calculations Many investors need assistance in understanding how much loan is good for them. The financial pressures arising from debt are linked to debt repayment. What is the Equated Monthly Instalment (EMI) for a loan under consideration? EMI can easily be calculated in